adding experimental project export instructions for iOS (#2470)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/packaging/project-export/project-export-ios.md

---
linkTitle: Project Export iOS
title: Project Export for iOS
description: (Experimental) Learn how to use the Project Export CLI to create an Xcode project to build and deploy for iOS.
toc: true
weight: 450
---
This guide covers how to use project export tooling to build and deploy games on iOS. First, we will use the iOS export script to generate an Xcode project and prepare assets. Afterwards we will walk through how to ensure Xcode is properly setup to build an iOS app.

For this demonstration, we will use the O3DE Atom Sample Viewer project as our reference point for ensuring proper behavior. Results may vary for other projects.

{{< note >}}

> To learn more about the project export tooling, please consult the page [Project Export CLI Tool.](project-export-cli)

Reviewer: Broken link. Relative paths work differently inside `note` shortcodes -- as if the note were one directory level deeper. You will need to either add a `../` in front of this path or use an absolute path.
```suggestion
To learn more about the project export tooling, please consult the page [Project Export CLI Tool.](/docs/user-guide/packaging/project-export/project-export-cli)
```

{{< /note >}}
{{< important >}}
The iOS export functionality is only available on macOS, which is currently experimental for O3DE.
{{< /important >}}

## Prerequisites

> 1. Make sure that the [Project Export CLI Tool page.](project-export-cli) prerequisites are satisfied. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Make sure that the [Project Export CLI Tool page](project-export-cli) prerequisites are satisfied. 
```

```
<O3DE_ENGINE>/scripts/o3de.sh register -pp /path/to/o3de-atom-sampleviewer
```
4. Have a valid copy of Xcode installed on your machine, and a valid Apple Developer ID associated with that IDE. To set up such an ID, go to [developer.apple.com](https://developer.apple.com). To use your desired Apple ID, in Xcode go to `Xcode -> Settings`. In the Settings window, go to the Accounts tab and click the '+' icon at the bottom of the left panel to add your account. Select Apple ID to proceed, and follow on-screen instructions.
5. You will also need to ensure that Xcode has the standard SDKs installed for macOS and iOS, and that your preferred iOS test device is compatible with Xcode. If you are not sure, you can consult [this page on installing Simulator Runtimes](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xcode/installing-additional-simulator-runtimes).

## Quickstart
### Running the Export Script
Assuming you are just following along using the O3DE Atom Sampleviewer project, this single invocation should be all you need to generate the necessary Xcode project file in the project's build folder:
```
export O3DE_ENGINE_PATH=/path/to/o3de

> $(O3DE_ENGINE_PATH)/scripts/o3de.sh export-project -es $(O3DE_ENGINE_PATH)/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py -pp /path/to/o3de-atom-sampleviewer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$O3DE_ENGINE_PATH/scripts/o3de.sh export-project -es $O3DE_ENGINE_PATH/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py -pp /path/to/o3de-atom-sampleviewer
```

```

> Where `O3DE_ENGINE_PATH` is an environment variable that should point to the folder location of the O3DE Source engine on your machine.

Reviewer 2: Should make this a {{<note>}} 
```suggestion
{{< note >}}
The `$O3DE_ENGINE_PATH` variable is set to the absolute path to the location of the O3DE source on your machine
{{< /note >}}
```

> Assuming the underlying CMake build system finds no issues with your engine or project installation, you should have the corresponding Xcode project file, which will be located at `<PROJECT>/build/game_ios`. For the Atom SampleViewer, it should be called `AtomSampleViewer.xcodeproj`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assuming the underlying CMake build system finds no issues with your engine or project installation, you should have the corresponding Xcode project file, which will be located at `$PROJECT_PATH/build/game_ios`. For the Atom SampleViewer, it should be called `AtomSampleViewer.xcodeproj`.
```

### Using Xcode
Double click the file `AtomSampleViewer.xcodeproj` to open it in Xcode. This should load everything needed to build the app on an iOS device.

> Deploying to an iOS device requires code-signing (even test builds). Make sure that you have a provisioning profile setup for code-signing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deploying to an iOS device requires code-signing. Make sure that you have a provisioning profile setup for code-signing.
```

> Next, we'll open the project configuration details. Click on the AtomSampleViewer project icon in the Explorer tree-view (left hand side of the Xcode IDE). On the left column under "General", select the build configuration `AtomSampleViewer.GameLauncher`. The resulting configuration page should look like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, we'll open the project configuration details. Click on the `AtomSampleViewer` project icon in the Explorer tree-view (left hand side of the Xcode IDE). On the left column under "General", select the build configuration `AtomSampleViewer.GameLauncher`. The resulting configuration page should look like this:
```

{{< image-width "/images/user-guide/packaging/project-export-ios/atom-sampleviewer-configuration-page.png" "700">}}

> Then go to the "signing and capabilities" tab, and setup the provisioning profile to link to your AppleID. Customize the bundle identifier (add any string you want, for example: append the phrase 'test'). Enable "Automatically manage signing."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Go to the "signing and capabilities" tab, and setup the provisioning profile to link to your AppleID. Customize the bundle identifier (add any string you want, for example: append the phrase 'test'). Enable "Automatically manage signing."
```

{{< image-width "/images/user-guide/packaging/project-export-ios/signing-and-capabilities-page.png" "700">}}

> Now click on the bar in the region labeled “AtomSampleViewer.GameLauncher”, and scroll through the drop down to click “Edit Scheme.”

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Click on the bar in the region labeled “AtomSampleViewer.GameLauncher” and scroll through the drop down to click “Edit Scheme.”
```

{{< image-width "/images/user-guide/packaging/project-export-ios/edit-scheme.png" "700">}}

> Set the desired build configuration, and in the arguments section, set the relevant CLI parameters. An example configuration is shown below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set the desired build configuration and set the relevant CLI parameters in the arguments section. An example configuration is shown below:
```

{{< image-width "/images/user-guide/packaging/project-export-ios/scheme-configuration-debug-build.png" "700">}}
{{< image-width "/images/user-guide/packaging/project-export-ios/scheme-configuration-cli-params.png" "700">}}

{{< note >}}

> Subsequent runs of the iOS Export script will clear any CLI configurations you provide in the Xcode project file, because the entire project file is re-generated. If you need changes to stick, you can specify the commands to run on launch for a release build via code or by using the `autoexec.client.setreg`. like so: https://docs.o3de.org/docs/user-guide/packaging/windows-release-builds/#set-the-starting-level 

Reviewer 2: This is a little vague or confusing, and I'm not sure this is needed. This is the case for all platforms if we regenerate with the export script. But you also have an option not to generate as well and the generation was a convenience thing. And the settings that are manually aren't just arguments to pass in right? There are other settings as well, which is not related to the game and cannot be 'stuck' inside the `autoexec.client.setreg`.

> Subsequent runs of the iOS Export script will clear any CLI configurations you provide in the Xcode project file, because the entire project file is re-generated. If you need changes to stick, you can specify the commands to run on launch for a release build via code or by using the `autoexec.client.setreg`. like so: https://docs.o3de.org/docs/user-guide/packaging/windows-release-builds/#set-the-starting-level 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subsequent runs of the iOS Export script will clear any CLI configurations you provide in the Xcode project file, because the entire project file is re-generated. If you need changes to stick, you can specify the commands to run on launch for a release build via code or by using the `autoexec.client.setreg`. You can find an example of this in [Set the starting level](/docs/user-guide/packaging/windows-release-builds/#set-the-starting-level).
```

> These launch parameters specified in the schema likely will be removed the next time you configure with CMake

Reviewer 2: Instead, i'd change the note to tell them to always set the launch parameter inside `autoexec.client.setreg`

{{< /note >}}

> Now make sure to connect your iOS device to the computer. Xcode should recognize your device, and it should be compatible with the project. If not, follow the XCode error prompts to trouble shoot the issue. Updating may be required. Once this is all correct, press the play button to build the project. This can take some time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure to connect your iOS device to the computer. Xcode should recognize your device, and it should be compatible with the project. If not, follow the Xcode error prompts to trouble shoot the issue and updating may be required. Once this is all correct, press the play button to build and deploy the project.
```

> Once everything is done, assuming you used the sample configuration, you should get the following on your iOS device:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the build and deployment successfully completes (assuming you used the sample configuration), you should get the following on your iOS device:
```

{{< image-width "/images/user-guide/packaging/project-export-ios/o3de-atom-sampleviewer-ios-device-result.png" "700">}}

## iOS Export Script
O3DE ships with an experimental [iOS Export Script](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py), capable of generating an Xcode project file to handle standard use cases of O3DE projects on iOS. This script is only designed to run from an O3DE source installation on a macOS machine.

> The export script has 2 primary sections: the function [`export_ios_xcode_project`](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py#L16) and the [startup code that only runs if the script is invoked by the CLI](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py#L73). In depth discussion on these two sections will be made in the [Developer Guide](https://docs.o3de.org/docs/engine-dev/) in the future.

Reviewer 2: Unless you created a GHI to do what is promised here, its better not to mention it and forget not to do it.

Author: I will be adding a GHI for this particular issue before I wrap up

> The export script has 2 primary sections: the function [`export_ios_xcode_project`](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py#L16) and the [startup code that only runs if the script is invoked by the CLI](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py#L73). In depth discussion on these two sections will be made in the [Developer Guide](https://docs.o3de.org/docs/engine-dev/) in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The export script has two primary sections: the function [`export_ios_xcode_project`](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py#L16) and the [startup code that only runs if the script is invoked by the CLI](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py#L73). In-depth discussion on these two sections will be made in the [Developer Guide](https://docs.o3de.org/docs/engine-dev/) in the future.
```

### Usage

> To use the export script, you can issue the arguments for this script at the same time that you are running the `export-project` command, so long as you are using this script as your designated export script. The arguments specific to the script will be deferred until the script begins running.

Reviewer 2: 'script' is repeated four times in this sentence.

The arguments are as follows:
| Argument Name | Description | Required? |
| - | - | - |
| [`--script-help`](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py#L89) | Display the help information specifically for the export script. | no |

> | [`--build-tools`](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py#L90) | Specifies whether to build O3DE toolchain executables. This will build AssetBundlerBatch, AssetProcessorBatch. If asset tools have not been built, then assets cannot be processed. | no |

Reviewer: I think you meant an "and" instead of a comma.
```suggestion
| [`--build-tools`](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py#L90) | Specifies whether to build O3DE toolchain executables. This will build AssetBundlerBatch and AssetProcessorBatch. If asset tools have not been built, then assets cannot be processed. | no |
```

| [`--ios-build-path`](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py#L94) | Designates where the Xcode project file for the project is generated. If not specified, default is `<o3de_project_path>/build/game_ios`. | no |
| [`--skip-asset-processing`](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py#L96) | For iOS building and deployment, the export script assumes that assets should be processed and built. If this behavior is not desired, use this flag to disable it. | no |
| [`--quiet`](https://github.com/o3de/o3de/blob/9b90a24479e2b191d2125d34c1984b013b2cb13f/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py#L98) | Suppresses logging information unless an error occurs. | no |

Here is an example usage of this script:
```
# On Mac

> $(O3DE_ENGINE_PATH)/scripts/o3de.sh export-project \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$O3DE_ENGINE_PATH/scripts/o3de.sh export-project \
```

> # On Mac
> $(O3DE_ENGINE_PATH)/scripts/o3de.sh export-project \
>     --export-script $(O3DE_ENGINE_PATH)/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py \
>     --project-path $(O3DE_PROJECT_PATH) \
>     --ios-build-path $(IOS_OUTPUT_PATH)

Reviewer 2: Don't backslash, this causes problems when people try to click on the `copy` button and paste directly. In addition to `O3DE_ENGINE_PATH` and `PROJECT_PATH`, you should also set an environment variable of `$IOS_OUTPUT_PATH` and describe what it is.

```suggestion
export IOS_OUTPUT_PATH=/path/to/ios/build/path

$O3DE_ENGINE_PATH/scripts/o3de.sh export-project --export-script $(O3DE_ENGINE_PATH)/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py --project-path $PROJECT_PATH --ios-build-path $IOS_OUTPUT_PATH
```

```

> Where `O3DE_ENGINE_PATH`, `O3DE_PROJECT_PATH` and `IOS_OUTPUT_PATH` are environment variables.

Reviewer 2: Ah ok, can you describe them in more detail here

> Where `O3DE_ENGINE_PATH`, `O3DE_PROJECT_PATH` and `IOS_OUTPUT_PATH` are environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`O3DE_ENGINE_PATH`, `O3DE_PROJECT_PATH` and `IOS_OUTPUT_PATH` are environment variables.
```

---
linkTitle: Project Export iOS
title: Project Export for iOS
description: (Experimental) Learn how to use the Project Export CLI to create an Xcode project to build and deploy for iOS.
toc: true
weight: 450
---
This guide covers how to use project export tooling to build and deploy games on iOS. First, we will use the iOS export script to generate an Xcode project and prepare assets. Afterwards we will walk through how to ensure Xcode is properly setup to build an iOS app.

For this demonstration, we will use the O3DE Atom Sample Viewer project as our reference point for ensuring proper behavior. Results may vary for other projects.

{{< note >}}
To learn more about the project export tooling, please consult the page [Project Export CLI Tool.](project-export-cli)
{{< /note >}}
{{< important >}}
The iOS export functionality is only available on macOS, which is currently experimental for O3DE.
{{< /important >}}

## Prerequisites

> 1. Complete the [Project Export CLI Tool page.](project-export-cli)  prerequisites. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Make sure that the [Project Export CLI Tool page.](project-export-cli) prerequisites are satisfied.
```

2. Git clone [O3DE Atom Sample Viewer project](https://github.com/o3de/o3de-atom-sampleviewer) onto your machine.
3. Register [O3DE Atom Sample Viewer project](https://github.com/o3de/o3de-atom-sampleviewer) with O3DE. You can register the project using:
```

> <O3DE_ENGINE>/scripts/o3de.sh register -pp /path/to/o3de-atom-sampleviewer

Reviewer 2: its not always obvious what `<O3DE_ENGINE>` means. I don't see any explanation in this document. This needs to be pointed out, and maybe use an environment variable prefix `$` (for mac) instead. 
```
    export O3DE_ENGINE=$HOME/o3de
```
or something.

```
4. Have a valid copy of Xcode installed on your machine, and a valid Apple Developer ID associated with that IDE. To set up such an ID, go to [developer.apple.com](https://developer.apple.com). To use your desired Apple ID, in Xcode go to `Xcode -> Settings`. In the Settings window, go to the Accounts tab and click the '+' icon at the bottom of the left panel to add your account. Select Apple ID to proceed, and follow on-screen instructions.
5. You will also need to ensure that Xcode has the standard SDKs installed for macOS and iOS, and that your preferred iOS test device is compatible with Xcode. If you are not sure, you can consult [this page on installing Simulator Runtimes](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xcode/installing-additional-simulator-runtimes).

## Quickstart
### Running the Export Script
Assuming you are just following along using the O3DE Atom Sampleviewer project, this single invocation should be all you need to generate the necessary Xcode project file in the project's build folder:
```
<O3DE_ENGINE>/scripts/o3de.sh export-project -es <O3DE_ENGINE>/scripts/o3de/ExportScripts/export_source_ios_xcode.py -pp /path/to/o3de-atom-sampleviewer
```

> Assuming the underlying CMake build system finds no issues with your engine or project installation, you should have the corresponding Xcode project file, which will be located at `<PROJECT>/build/game_ios`. For the Atom SampleViewer, it should be called `AtomSampleViewer.xcodeproj`.

Reviewer 3: is `/build/game_ios` the actual path you ended up with or did you change it to `/build/ios_mono` ?

Author: yes, `/build/game_ios` is the actual path I got. This is because it's the default folder name for ios output in the export script itself.
